## Design considerations

### Do you need a mesh?

It will be helpful to review some background on wireless mesh and the role of the batman routing protocol. Optimum home network speeds will be achieved when each wireless access point is connected to the main router using an ethernet or fiber optic backhaul. In this scenario, the satellite access points should be configured as ["dumb" access points](https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-user/network/wifi/dumbap), and all access points should enable [802.11r fast transitions](https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-user/network/wifi/basic#fast_bss_transition_options_80211r). The batman routing protocol is not necessary for such a setup.

Another common scenario is one wireless router (gateway) and one satellite/repeater access point (client). The batman routing protocol is also not needed for this setup since there is only one route between the two nodes; we do not need batman to learn the route. Optimal performance will instead be achieved with [WDS](https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-user/network/wifi/atheroswds), or for hardware that does not support WDS, with [relayd](https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-user/network/wifi/relay_configuration).

[The batman routing protocol](https://www.open-mesh.org/projects/batman-adv/wiki) is useful in scenarios where a wireless backhaul will be used (i.e. because ethernet backhaul would be expensive to install) to connect three or more wireless nodes. Batman learns the optimal routes through the mesh. The 802.11s protocol has built-in support for routing frames through the mesh, but the batman protocol may be a little more performant than just plain 802.11s. Batman may also be more t than the linux kernel's default [OLSR routing protocol](https://www.open-mesh.org/projects/open-mesh/wiki/The-olsr-story) for lossy, wireless networks because it adapts to actual thouroughput, which may be less than advertised/predicted thoroughput due to wireless range and interference. Batman can also handle situations that 802.11s cannot such as hybrid wired/wireless networks with ethernet connections between some mesh nodes, bonding two or more radios/frequencies, and virtual lans (VLANs).

### Spectrum planning

The ideal device for a batman mesh has at least 3 radios. The most typical configuration is to use one 5 GHz radio as the 802.11s mesh backhaul, another 5 GHz radio as an access point (AP), and a 2.4 GHz radio as an AP. However, only a few devices (such as the Lyra used in this example) have 3 radios. Most wireless routers have two radios, one 5 GHz and one 2.4 GHz. In this case it is common to use the 5 GHz radio as the 802.11s mesh backhaul and set up the 2.4 GHz radio as an AP.

Typically you will want to use a 5 GHz radio for the mesh backhaul since the 5 GHz band has more bandwidth than the 2.4 GHz band. However, 2.4 GHz has longer range and may be a better choice if your mesh nodes are far apart. You may also use a device with a directional antenna to extend the mesh over long distances, for example, the [TP-link CPE510/CPE520](https://openwrt.org/toh/tp-link/cpe510).

Some radios support being configured as both access points (AP's) and 802.11s mesh nodes operating on the same frequency at the same time. While this configuration may be technically possible, it leads to interference between the 5 GHz AP and mesh traffic, which degrades performance and can cause unstable convergence of mesh routing.

### 802.11s mesh vs IBSS ad-hoc

There are two wireless modes suitable for mesh networks. Older hardware and Intel wireless chipsets support [802.11 IBSS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Service_set_(802.11_network)#Independent), or so-called "ad-hoc" mode. Radios configured in IBSS mode can communicate with other radios in wireless range, but they are not aware of radios not in their immediate wireless range (e.g. more than one hop away). This is not a problem when using the batman routing protocol because batman will learn about all the radios in the mesh, even those not in direct wireless range. However, there are other advantages to using 802.11s if your radio supports it (see below).

Radios configured in the newer [802.11s](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IEEE_802.11s) mesh mode are aware of all the radios in the mesh and can even perform their own routing. However, we do not need this added functionality since batman will handle the routing for us. **Does 802.11s provide any advantage over IBSS?** Yes! In addition to routing, 802.11s also specifies a mechanism for all the radios in the mesh to sync up their beacon intervals in order to avoid collisions. IBSS is only capable of collision avoidance between nodes in direct wireless range of each other, leading to collisions in multi-hop mesh networks due to the [hidden terminal problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hidden_node_problem). Thus, 802.11s provides better performance (collision avoidance) than IBSS even when using batman.

In summary, if you have older hardware that doesn't support 802.11s, go ahead and use IBSS. If all of your mesh nodes will be in direct wireless range of each other then consider IBSS. Otherwise, or if in doubt, choose 802.11s for better collision avoidance.